[THEME MUSIC]
>>LISA GARR: Hi, I'm Lisa Garr,
host of "Gaia Inspirations."
And the topic for the series
at the Celebrate Your Life
Conference in
Phoenix, Arizona, is
to explore the "I am" meaning.
And in a book called
"I Am That," it says,
to know what you are,
find what you are not.
And my guest, Chris Grosso,
knows what he is not.
But he also knows what he is.
He is an indie
spiritualist, and that
is the name of his first book.
And also, his second book
is called "Everything Mind."
Welcome.
Thank you for being here.
>>CHRIS GROSSO: Thank
you, Lisa, for having me.
>>LISA: Who wrote the
book, "I Am That"?
>>GROSSO: Ah, Nisargadatta,
a wonderful mystic saint
from India.
>>LISA: So let's talk about it.
To know what you are, you
need to know what you are not.
And you said, at one
point, I am not a preacher.
I am not a yogi.
I am not on the Himalayas.
I am-- finish that
sentence for me.
>>GROSSO: Mm.
Ha.
If I had to finish it, I would
say, I am loving awareness,
is the best thing I could say.
It gets tricky though,
because once you add anything
onto the "I am"
statement, if you're
speaking in the
"absolute" terms,
it starts to negate what "I am"
actually means, because "I am"
is simply I am.
It's an is-ness, a stillness,
with nothing else added to it.
But relative
reality is also part
of the equation, which is,
here we are right now, speaking
the physical.
So "I am" on the
absolute realm; I am.
Or I am loving awareness,
witnessing awareness.
Here right now, I am also Chris
Grosso speaking with Lisa Garr.
>>LISA: Uh-huh.
>>GROSSO: There are two sides.
>>LISA: So when the statement
came through, "I am,"
that "I am" that we
hear in the Bible
that we've read so
many times, and heard,
is that basically saying,
I am everything that I am.
>>GROSSO: I would say so.
I love when Jesus says,
I and the Father are one.
Ken Wilber, who wrote the
forward for "Everything Mind,"
has been a hugely influential
teacher in my own life.
And he talks about
what he calls spirit
in action, which is spirit
constantly evolving and waking
up to and making itself
more available to itself
through its evolution.
So from matter, to body, to
mind, to soul, to spirit.
And that's all spirit
evolving, and again,
becoming more
available to itself.
So in this moment,
literally everything
is imbued by spirit,
whether it's this glass,
the water, you, I, all things.
So spirit is in all things.
All things are in spirit.
Yeah.
So I am that I am.
>>LISA: Wow.
This is a great way to
talk about your story,
because you have truly evolved
from matter to enlightenment.
Think about it.
>>GROSSO: It's still
a process, but yeah.
>>LISA: Right.
Of course.
It's a process for all of us.
But talk a little bit
about your back story,
about how you got
to this awareness of
and studying deeply
the spiritual texts.
>>GROSSO: Yeah.
So I share a story
that many people
have on the
spiritual path, which
is it was drugs and alcohol that
essentially brought me to it.
And I started out
just like anyone,
experimenting as a teenager.
But for me, that
experimentation quickly
turned into regular
use, then abuse, then
full-blown addiction
around the age of 19.
I was also playing in bands and
touring around at this time.
So at all these various
shows in different states
I was going to, there was always
different drugs available,
and I was always happy
to try these new drugs.
And I was a "functioning"
addict for a few years,
but it just spiraled out
of control until about 24,
when I entered my first detox.
And from there, that
was a good experience.
Because from detox
I went into rehab,
and I learned about the
brain science of addiction,
and that I wasn't insane.
I actually had this
disease of addiction.
But that wasn't the
end of the story.
>>LISA: Well, that's-- what
you do with that information is
the turning point.
But let's go back
to what you said,
that you have a story
like many others.
That this is a culture
that exists and is growing.
It's always existed.
'60s, '70s, '80s,
'90s, before that.
So what do you believe
that is the reason why
this much experimentation
even begins?
Where does that start from?
>>GROSSO: Boy, that
is a great question.
>>LISA: It's a deep one, yeah.
>>GROSSO: It is.
I only feel comfortable
answering it
from my own experience,
because I can't tell you
why other people do it.
But I can tell you when
I began experimenting.
And to be totally
honest, I was just
into all sorts of weird
counterculture things.
I was enamored with David Lynch
movies, and Quentin Tarantino
movies, and listening to
totally abstract bands.
And even if I named them now,
I'm sure most of your listeners
wouldn't know.
But just all things
kind of strange.
And for me, an extension of
that was drugs and alcohol.
I didn't get into it right away.
I was "straight edge," which
is drug and alcohol free,
for 9th and 10th grade.
But it was in 11th
into 12th grade,
I just really started
experimenting deeper with said
weirdness and counterculture.
And not to say that all people
that are into that go the route
of drugs and alcohol,
because they certainly don't.
But for me, it was just,
again, an extension.
>>LISA: I mean, it's
part of the psyche,
to experiment and to find the
boundaries and where you begin
and-- so where were your
parents in this scene?
>>GROSSO: They were there.
Like I said in the
beginning, it really
was just experimentation.
So there was no cause for alarm.
I was pretty good at hiding
it, for the most part, until I
wasn't able to hide it anymore.
And I think my parents would
say that they went through what
a lot of other parents do, which
is a bit of denial at first.
They knew I was
excessively doing things.
This is several years into it.
But I don't think that they
wanted to completely accept it.
>>LISA: Maybe they
didn't know what to do.
>>GROSSO: That's also the case.
Because in the
beginning, I experienced
what a lot of other
addicts experience,
where their friends, family,
people that care about them,
just get angry.
Because they see that
they're harming themselves,
and they want them to stop,
but they don't understand
the disease model of addiction.
And I know my parents
didn't either at first.
So there were times where they
would just get upset with me
about it.
Understandably,
because I'm their son,
and they didn't want me
to go down that road.
And it pains me to this day
think about how many times
they had to see me strapped
down to an emergency room
or in jail cells and
things of that nature.
But I am blessed, in the
sense that my parents did
take the time to educate
themselves over the years,
and now they understand
better what it is I live with.
>>LISA: Were there are other
addicts in your family?
Because I do understand
it's generational.
>>GROSSO: Yes.
That is certainly part of it.
It's interesting though,
because on my dad's side,
he grew up in foster care.
So we really don't know anything
about his side of the family,
for the most part.
My mom's side, there were
a few cases of alcoholism,
nothing that was rampant.
But I have a brother who's
two years younger than I am,
and he never went
down that road.
Complete polar opposites.
I think part of that
though is attributed to he
saw what I went through,
and that scared him.
Scared him to not even
really start experimenting.
I think he could probably
count the amount of times
he drank on one hand.
>>LISA: So what type
of advice would you
give someone who is in
the middle of that path?
With all your
experience and now that
you're on the other side
of it, what type of advice
would you give them?
>>GROSSO: That is in the
middle of addiction or abuse?
Yeah.
See, it's very hard to
actually give advice to someone
when they're in the
grips of addiction.
They're literally not
in their right brain.
Addicts resort to what's
called the old brain,
the reptilian brain.
So they're not working from
their conscious forebrain
at that point anymore.
So it's hard to
reason with an addict.
And that's why a lot of people
have to hit a rock bottom.
And that's not to say
that the rock bottom needs
to be as rock bottom as mine was
or a lot of other people's are,
because we can
raise that bottom.
But it's hard.
There's not a lot of advice.
I can sit here and say-- if
you were in the middle of it,
I can ask you to please
take an honest look at what
you're going through right now.
But chances are, if
you're sitting there
in the middle of
addiction, no matter
what I say, your thoughts are
on, I need to get more drugs.
I need to get more alcohol.
And that's all you're
really focused on.
It's a survival
instinct at that point.
>>LISA: And I can't
hear you at all.
>>GROSSO: No.
I mean, you can hear
me, but literally,
since you're in that
different brain,
all you're concerned with
is drugs and alcohol.
It's life or death to
you, even to the point
where a lot of addicts
will kill themselves.
But it is a life or death
mindset at that point.
>>LISA: What was
the end for you?
How did you absolutely
reach the rock bottom
and turn it around for yourself?
>>GROSSO: I've hit a number
of rock bottoms in my life,
and each time, it was as if the
bottom gave out, to be honest.
So for me, it's
a daily reprieve.
It's something that I need
to maintain every day.
Because I will never be a
"recovering addict" that says
I'm fully recovered.
Because I don't believe, until
the day I die, that I am.
It's a disease that
I will live with.
So if I'm not taking
care of myself,
I always run the risk of
going back to that lifestyle.
>>LISA: But does
that allow you--
does that phrase or
statement or frame of mind
allow you to release the
shackles of being an addict,
or not?
>>GROSSO: I don't-- huh,
that's a great question.
So there are some people
that will strictly say,
I am an addict.
But no.
And I write about
this in my book.
It's very self
limiting, I believe,
to identify solely as that.
So I do have this
part of me that I
will live with for
the rest of my life,
and that just is the way it is.
I can never safely touch a drug
or a drink of alcohol, ever.
>>LISA: Correct.
But could you say,
I was an addict?
>>GROSSO: What I feel
more comfortable saying
is I am a recovering addict,
or I am an addict in recovery.
However, I only
really say that phrase
if I'm at a formal step meeting.
Otherwise, I don't go out there
saying I'm this, I'm that.
It's just-- because like
we said in the beginning
of this interview,
I am that I am.
Simply, I am that I am.
I just happen to live with--
just like someone lives
with diabetes or something else.
I have something I live with
that I need to be aware of
and do my best to
take care of that.
>>LISA: And that best is
through your spiritual path.
>>GROSSO: Absolutely, it is.
>>LISA: That's
where you found it.
Where did you start?
How did you first
get interested?
What was the line for you
that-- the fishing line?
>>GROSSO: Yeah.
So my fishing line came in the
form of a professor in college.
So after my first time, at
24, through detox and rehab,
which I already
mentioned, I decided
I wanted to go to school.
I wanted to go to school for
substance abuse counseling.
And so I enrolled,
and my professor also
happened to be my
academic adviser.
And she became a very motherly
figure to me and a woman
I trusted.
Up to this point, I had no
interest in spirituality,
for the most part.
And it was-- I don't
know, maybe about a year
or so into having
her as my professor.
I was going through a
breakup at the time.
And she saw I wasn't
in a good way.
So during one of our
academic advising sessions,
she gave me a book called,
"The Power of Now,"
by Eckhart Tolle.
And that was it.
And I wish I had some
grand, exciting story,
but it was literally--
>>LISA: No, that's
how it happens.
When the student is ready,
the teacher will appear.
And we're always students.
>>GROSSO: Always.
Yes, I know I
still very much am.
>>LISA: Yes.
So you started down
this journey, and what
made the most sense to you?
Was it meditation, or
was it the introspection?
Or what made the
most sense to you?
Because you couldn't just
go to the mountaintop.
You were interested in
counterculture music.
You didn't want to
change that, right?
>>GROSSO: No.
I mean, I always honor my heart.
And if my heart guided me to
lead that kind of lifestyle,
then I would honor that.
I'm not attached to
anything in that sense.
However, I still love
that kind of music,
and it doesn't impact my
spiritual lifestyle whatsoever.
So what I found is actually
bringing spirituality
into all areas of my life, which
is what "Everything Mind" is
about.
So it's not just when I'm
formally sitting in meditation,
or if I'm working with a mantra.
That, of course, is part of it.
But when I get up off that
cushion, I bring that with me,
and I try to cultivate
more moments of mindfulness
throughout my day.
Even one breath is a meditation.
So if I'm able to
remember 10 times a day
to, no matter what I'm
doing, just stop and take
a conscious breath, I'm
meditating 10 times a day,
on top of sitting
once or twice a day.
But to answer your question, I
think the path of meditation,
for me, has been the biggest
learning to quiet the mind.
And not just quiet the mind,
but more than anything,
I've found meditation helps me
to show up today and live life
on life's terms,
for the most part.
Some days, of course,
are better than others.
But really, be peaceful with the
change that life is constantly.
It's always changing.
So to make peace with that.
>>LISA: We're going to
take a look here at a video
that Chris did, talking about
what he feels that spirituality
should show up like.
Take a look.
>>GROSSO: I don't like hearing
people telling me that it's
this way, or it's that way.
Oh, and this is the right
way, and you're wrong.
Who is anyone to say that they
have the definitive truth?
You know, I know that
I definitely don't.
And in the book,
my style of writing
is I certainly share
my experiences.
I'm pretty candid in them.
And I share these so I can show
people some of my pitfalls,
in the hopes that maybe they can
avoid that in their own path.
I let them know what's
worked for me, what hasn't.
But at the end of
the day, I want
you to be your own spiritual
scientist, let's say.
Find out for
yourself-- I know this
is kind of a contradictory
term, but experiment.
Find out what works for you.
And I offer
practices in the back
of the book from various
wisdom traditions,
from Buddhism or Hinduism,
even Christianity.
I mean, I think there's
wonderful, beautiful things
in all of it.
But spirituality is
not just found there.
It's not just found
in yoga studios.
It's not just found on
meditation cushions,
in churches, or sanghas.
It can certainly be found
there, but it's all around us
at all times.
Whether you're on a skateboard,
or you're hiking in nature,
you play in a band,
or you're making love.
Whatever it is, it's
always available to us.
>>LISA: So you have
a way of bringing
the messages of ancient texts
and spiritual information
to a culture of our youth,
of a great generation.
How do you bring
that information
and meet people
where they're at?
>>GROSSO: Something that anyone
who has read my books will know
is I try to bring in some
pop culture references.
I find that is very
user-friendly way
to meet people where they are
in today's fast-paced world.
And so I'll quote something
from, let's say, the Gita,
but then I'll pull in a quote
from "Anchorman," a Will
Ferrell movie, or a
concert I've gone to,
and tie in a spiritual
experience I've
had there, in places that
are not traditionally thought
of as spiritual in nature.
So I try to bring
it all to the path,
lay it all out on the table.
And I found that it's really
resonated with people.
So.
>>LISA: I mean, that's the
whole point of your message.
As you said, I'm not a
yogi from the Himalayas,
or a preacher from
the pulpit, or a guru
with a dollar sign in my eyes.
The truth is, as a result
of years of the drug use,
that you have been
to some dark places,
and that you're here to
help people see the light.
So when you have,
maybe a friend,
who is maybe from the days where
you were using, and so forth,
have they contacted you?
Have people contacted
you from that?
>>GROSSO: Yeah.
They have.
And complete strangers.
I get messages,
literally, every day,
whether people that are
just new into recovery,
or family members, if their
son or daughter is struggling.
But yeah, always
getting contacted.
So--
>>LISA: What are you saying?
>>GROSSO: Well,
it's case by case.
But it's always-- I will
address wherever they're at
and try to offer
guidance, whatever I can.
Because usually, it's
from people, maybe
in a different country, the
other side of the country.
>>LISA: But where do you start?
>>GROSSO: Yeah.
So where do you start?
So let's say it's someone
that is ready to get help.
At that point, then it's OK.
First thing is I
always recommend
people don't try to do it alone,
especially in the beginning.
If maybe you don't need to
go to detox, maybe you do.
That's something that needs to
very seriously be considered,
because withdrawals,
if it's from alcohol
or benzodiazepines,
can kill someone.
I've had a seizure a few
times, and they are terrible.
Luckily, that's the worst
that's happened to me.
But often, you need
medical attention.
But from there, taking maybe
28 days and going into a rehab
and really taking yourself out
of your life for a little bit,
so you can really focus and
get a bit of solid footing
underneath you,
some solid ground,
so you can re-emerge into your
everyday life, but from a place
where you have more knowledge
about what you're living with.
You will have support
at that point.
You'll have guidance.
You'll know where to go when
you're back out into the world.
I don't advocate one kind
of recovery over another.
There's no shortage
of different paths.
What I advocate or
what I stress is
find what works for
you and something
that you can stick with.
That's the most important thing.
>>LISA: When you have
people coming out of rehab,
and then they do
reiterate back into life,
and you were in that
situation as well,
what is the first
thing that they
can start to do to start
to go on to that stair step
up towards growth,
enlightenment, awareness?
Awareness, let's
start with that.
What's that first step?
>>GROSSO: First thing,
find a community
of people that can support
you in your journey, whatever
that community may be.
Whether it is a
medication group,
whether it is a yoga
class, whether it
is a 12-step fellowship.
Or maybe it's a combination
of some of those things.
But find people that will
support you on your path.
Don't do it alone.
That was something
that I fell into.
I'm naturally
introverted, by nature.
And so I would start
to reach out a bit,
but then I would
gradually pull away.
And that was part of the reason
why I would always end up
relapsing, is I'd be
isolating, and I was never
a social drinker.
I would always end up drinking
in my apartment, by myself.
So by not having that support,
it just-- every time I
ended up going back out.
>>LISA: And which
group did you associate
with in the beginning,
with community?
>>GROSSO: It was both-- for me,
most of it was both AA and NA.
Both of the fellowships, I found
there was a lot of great stuff.
And I will say that
some people have
a problem acknowledging
what the fellowship is
you're involved with.
I personally don't.
I think it's time that people
come out of the recovery
closet, so to speak.
But yeah.
I mean, I feel like the stigma
and the impact, it's just,
people have been hiding
behind fear of what
others think for far too long.
So I have no issues saying that.
But also, so now,
today, I'm more involved
in what's called
refuge recovery.
And it's a Buddhist take on
these 12-step traditions,
founded by Noah Levine,
who's the author Dharma Punx.
And it's a great fellowship, but
I'll still go to an AA meeting,
and I will still--
>>LISA: That sounds very cool.
Tell me a little
bit more about that.
>>GROSSO: So essentially,
Noah started this
because a lot of people
in the other fellowships
had an issue with
the "god" word.
Now, that's not something I
have an issue with at all.
So that's not why I
went to Refuge Recovery.
But I really like that they're
taking a Buddhist approach
to these 12 steps.
So it addresses more
of the suffering,
and the root cause of
suffering, and what
are a lot of these underlying
issues that were bringing you
to turn to drugs and alcohol.
And I just love that approach.
So yeah, I've been rooted
in that for a while.
>>LISA: You've been talking
a lot about suffering
and about what that
means, of going
from that place of darkness
and internal suffering
to a place of lightness.
What is your
perspective on that?
How do you get out of that
deep place of suffering?
>>GROSSO: Yeah.
Man.
>>LISA: It's deep, yeah.
>>GROSSO: It is.
And again, for me, it had
to be a complete bottom.
And I'm not saying that's
how it is for everyone.
But for me, I had to just
have everything shattered.
And I don't know
why that was for me.
But I can tell you that as
I was going through that,
I remember stumbling across a
Ram Dass quote that helped me
significantly, in which
he says, "suffering
is the sandpaper
of our incarnation.
It does its job of shaping us."
And I read that,
and I was like, oh.
All right.
So all of this is
not for nothing.
There can be good
that comes from this.
And so really, the
beautiful thing I found was
it left me in such
a vulnerable place,
where my ego was beat down,
the white flag was up,
my heart armor was shattered.
I was really finally able to go
into these raw and vulnerable
places and start sifting
through that wreckage of my past
and working with these places
I was just scared to go to.
Because they're very
uncomfortable to work with.
And not just for
addicts, for anyone.
Anyone.
>>LISA: Absolutely.
And then you've got
to get on with life.
So what do you do
now for a living?
Do you teach for a living?
>>GROSSO: Yeah.
I write books.
I speak at these
wonderful conferences,
like we're at right now.
>>LISA: And you went
right to doing that?
>>GROSSO: Pretty much.
Out of my last
treatment program,
which was a little over
four years ago, I came home.
And for the first
time in my life,
I had to file for unemployment.
I had no job.
Even though I was an
addict for those years,
I was still able to hold down
a job, for the most part.
Or when I would have
to leave, you're
covered under, in my state,
a family medical act.
But anyways, so when I
came home, really, nothing.
My car was repossessed
when I was in treatment.
I had lost my job.
And the one thing that I
started doing in treatment,
before I got home-- and I still
do to this day, every day--
is I make the
intention or prayer
to help-- I say it
to, we'll say "God,"
or whatever you care to call it.
But please help me
to lay myself aside,
so that your will will
be done through me.
It's kind of cliche, but in
a very heart-centered way.
Like, please help me
to set myself aside,
so the greater good can come
through this vessel that
is Chris Grosso, and be of
service in whatever way,
to however many
people you'd like.
And when I started
saying that, I
did not say it
with the intention
of but I want to be
writing books and speaking.
No.
If I had to be working at a
gas station or a janitor--
not that there's anything
wrong with those things--
I was going to do
whatever my path was.
But I attribute that completely
to why I'm here today,
is that aspiration.
>>LISA: So when you did back
yourself off and lay yourself
aside, what showed up?
>>GROSSO: The first thing I was
compelled, felt moved to do,
was I'd been journaling a lot.
I have for many years, but
particularly in this last rehab
I was in.
And I felt moved to start
writing or sharing a bit of it
online.
So I did with some websites that
accepted unsolicited material,
and it really started
connecting with people.
And someone got a hold of that.
And then from there,
I got introduced
to my literary agent.
And it was about a
year and a half rehab
that I signed a book deal.
And yeah, it was--
>>LISA: That is amazing.
>>GROSSO: Very surreal.
Because I never went
to school for writing.
And that's, again, why I say,
I attribute it all to this.
>>LISA: This
underlying awareness.
What does that mean to you?
>>GROSSO: This
witnessing awareness.
It's aware of all things that
are happening at all times,
and that goes back to
when we were a child.
It's the one thing
that has never changed,
the entire time, since we've
taken this birth and this time
around, is this
witnessing awareness.
It's the one thing
that is always present
and never changing.
A constant state of
non-biased, unjudgmental--
if that's even a word.
>>LISA: Nonattachment.
Yeah.
>>GROSSO: Not attached.
Just a witnessing awareness.
>>LISA: So witnessing
our awareness
from a detached place.
Not disconnected, but
we're not hooked by it.
>>GROSSO: Right.
It's just completely
unaffected by what's going on
in this relative form level.
It's a completely-- again,
unbiased, just awareness.
Just witnessing what's going on.
>>LISA: You said a
phrase to me that I
adopted as one in my life now.
You said, what is the-- where
did you hear this first?
>>GROSSO: Oh.
So I heard it
first-- I don't know
if it's from them, but from
Noah Levine and Dharma Punx
community.
But "right now, it's like this."
>>LISA: That is the phrase.
Right now, it's like this.
[LAUGHS] There's so much--
>>GROSSO: For good or bad.
Right now, it's like this.
>>LISA: It's like this.
It's just a total
place of acceptance.
And that allows you to
stay in the present moment,
to accept what is
in that moment.
And sometimes, in that
moment, you can't change it.
You can change it in the moments
ahead or in the circumstances
ahead.
But for that moment,
if you accept it,
it will most likely change
in the moments ahead.
>>GROSSO: Absolutely.
>>LISA: There's so much to be
said for accepting that phrase.
Right now, it's like this.
>>GROSSO: Yeah.
And I'm a huge fan of
that too, because it does.
When we bring acceptance
to whatever is happening,
and that's not to say that-- if
we can do something about it,
we do something about it.
But we bring the acceptance.
And in that acceptance is
where the suffering leaves.
We suffer because we don't
accept what's happened.
We suffer because no,
I don't want this.
We-- and it's that boundary.
>>LISA: Control it.
>>GROSSO: Yes, absolutely.
So by bringing acceptance to
right now, it's like this,
then there's a spaciousness that
opens up around the situation.
And it's not that it's magically
perfect and life's beautiful.
But is it that much easier to
weather whatever life storm is
in the moment.
>>LISA: Do you have
that tattooed here?
That's a great--
>>GROSSO: [LAUGHS] I
don't have that line, no.
That's one of the only
things I probably don't have.
>>LISA: I like this,
is you've got hope.
And--
>>GROSSO: Bookworm.
>>LISA: Bookworm.
>>GROSSO: Loving kindness.
I have all sorts of--
>>LISA: That's great.
>>GROSSO: Oh, actually, yeah.
"God is," kind of like "I am."
You say God is, and
you leave it at that.
Because anything after
that starts to negate.
So just "I am."
God is.
>>LISA: Beautifully said.
Thank you so much.
That was a beautiful
definition and an embodiment
of what the "I am" is.
>>GROSSO: Thank you.
>>LISA: Thanks, Chris.
Appreciate you being here.
>>GROSSO: Thank
you for having me.
It's an honor.
>>LISA: Absolutely.
And if you would like to
watch a replay of my interview
with Chris Grosso, you
can go to gaia.com.
And until next time, I
advise you to stay inspired.
[THEME MUSIC]